In this lesson, I'll show you how an included file manager is convenient for accessing files at safe
ground and other shared hosts.
You'll also learn how to access the database using the common phpMyAdmin program.
By the end of this video, you'll understand how to access the files and database when the host provides
direct access to those resources.
Let's look at another resource for accessing the files.
I know that we've already looked at local and accessing the files just within our file explorer on the
computer, or it would be the finder on a Mac.
But if you're using a shared host or a host that has its own control panel, you might have a file manager
utility that you'll be able to use.
Let's look at the Vale Sinochem website that I showed in a previous section and look at the site ground
tools for accessing both the files and the database.
And so here I've got the site tools open for this website, and if we look under site, the first option
is file manager.
And this is a utility that makes it easy to access your files just as easily as if as if they were on
your own computer.
You don't have to download an FTP program in order to access the files.
Unlike some other, more advanced hosts.
And so if you just look here generally on website hosting, you'll have a public HTML or a folder called
public or call the HTML that houses the folders and files for the website.
And as you can see under public HTML, we've got three folders.
Here's an extra one called CGI bin.
You'll often have that you don't really necessarily need to deal with on your server, but inside the
file manager here we've got the three folders that WordPress uses, and we've got the other files here.
For example, here's the WP config dot file.
Now, if I were to click that and then I could click the edit button.
That's where I can go in and I could look at the database credentials for this.
And so we'll look at how we access the database manager called up my admin in order to do any database
changes here through the hosting company.
But you can access the WP config file right here, and this is where you would be accessing it.
So I could just click back in the breadcrumbs here to go back, Oh, I can close all the tabs.
There we go and back to the files here, and then we have these folders.
So if you needed to troubleshoot something at this host or a website at this host, you could go into
double WP content and I double click that and then I've got a folder called plug ins and you can see
what plugins I have installed.
And so, yeah, you can see I have a few plug ins here.
If I wasn't sure which one was causing the conflict, what I might do is just go in and rename each
of these plug ins.
One at a time in between going back to the website and seeing which one makes the website work again.
If you wanted to see if it was a plugin conflict at all.
You could even go into WP content and you can rename the plugins folder itself.
The result of that would be that you would deactivate all the plugins on the entire website and you
know, if the website's down anyway, it's not a bad idea to to try and figure out narrow down what
the cause of the problem might be.
So that's where you can access files in site ground or a similar shared host.
It has a control panel.
A lot of times something called cPanel that stands for control panel and also under the site tab.
Here on the left side, we also have my sequel.
Now, if you remember from the beginning of this section, my sequel is the type of database that we're
using for WordPress and under databases.
We've checked this out in the hosting section, but under phpMyAdmin, you can see that there's just
a an orange button that says Access phpMyAdmin, and by clicking that what it'll do is open a tab in
your browser and it will show you all the databases that are associated with this website.
Generally, you'll have one database associated with each website unless you have multiple WordPress
installations, you know, installed at subdirectories or something like that, which isn't very common.
But if you click the name of the database, you can see that I've got tables here, and it's more than
just a standard installation.
I have the I themes security plugin enabled, which does create these.
It's like database tables.
And so those are extra tables, but you can see all the traditional tables here.
There's the WP posts where the content of the posts and pages would be.
There's the user's table right here and you can see that.
It's using a different table prefix.
Remember, when we inspected the WP config file, we were looking at the table prefix, which by default
is WP underscore.
And oftentimes, when your host installs WordPress for you, it will choose a random string of numbers
or letters to use as the table prefix just to make it more secure.
And so all the same things that are here, if you were going to manage the user accounts and potentially
go in and want to edit or add or change the password of an existing user, you could do that right here.
It works very similarly to the admin or database manager that works with the local, but phpMyAdmin
just looks a little bit different.
You can use the edit button.
Here's my user account use the edit button.
For example, if I were going to change the password right here again, it's using the MD5 hash, and
so it's under the function dropdown where you would place your new password here and then you would
select MD5 in in the dropdown right here and then go back to down to the bottom and click Go or go right
here.
And that would save say it would save your changes and then you would be making those changes at the
database.
And so that gives you an idea of how to access the database and how to access the files in a site,
ground host or similar.
It's really convenient that it gives you a file manager.
And now we're going to talk about FTP in the next lesson.
FTP accounts are another way to access the files on a hosting server, and an FTP program is something
that you need to install on your computer and then use the credentials that you create when you create
a new FTP account.
FTP credentials are a hostname, along with likely a port number that you're supposed to use, as well
as an account name and a password.
Again, it's different from the WordPress username and password, and it's different from the database,
user username and password.
And so FTP stands for file transfer protocol.
It's just a way that you can access the files and you can download from there and upload to the server.
New files, if you need to do that.
And so in the next lesson, we'll check out how to access files at both flywheel and at grid pain.
Some more advanced hosts that we've talked about in the last section that don't have a file manager
built in, but they require you to use FTP if you do want to access the files at the server.